Doc: Tetragon metrics (#1495)
cilium/tetragon: docs/content/en/docs/tutorials/tetragon-metrics.md

Reviewer: please can you wrap the lines at ~80 chars?

Author: oh sorry for that, I had soft-wrap on, so it appeared Ok on my IDE. fixed that

Reviewer: no worries

---
title: "Tetragon Metrics"
weight: 1
icon: "overview"
description: "Fetching and understanding Tetragon metrics"
---

> # Fetching Tetragon Metrics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
There is already a title to the page

## Kubernetes

> Tetragon, when installed with Helm as mentioned in [Deploying on Kubernetes] ({{< ref "docs/getting-started/deployment/kubernetes" >}}), creates a pod with `tetragon-` prefix. It also creates a service named `tetragon` that exposes metrics on the specified port.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tetragon, when installed with Helm as mentioned in [Deploying on Kubernetes]({{< ref "docs/getting-started/deployment/kubernetes" >}}), creates a pod with the `tetragon-` prefix. It also creates a service named `tetragon` that exposes metrics on the specified port.
```

### Getting metrics port

> Check if `tetragon` service is running

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Check if the `tetragon` service exists:
```
Small suggestion, services are not really "running".

Author: Thank you, Fixed !

> Check if `tetragon` service is running
> 
> ```bash
> ➜  ~ kubectl get services -n kube-system
> NAME       TYPE        CLUSTER-IP     EXTERNAL-IP   PORT(S)                  AGE
> kube-dns   ClusterIP   10.96.0.10     <none>        53/UDP,53/TCP,9153/TCP   3m
> tetragon   ClusterIP   10.96.54.218   <none>        2112/TCP                 3m
> ```

Reviewer: Please [separate the command from its output](https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#separate-commands-from-output).
````suggestion
Check if the `tetragon` service is running:

```shell-session
kubectl get services tetragon -n kube-system
```

The output should be similar to:

```
NAME       TYPE        CLUSTER-IP     EXTERNAL-IP   PORT(S)                  AGE
tetragon   ClusterIP   10.96.54.218   <none>        2112/TCP                 3m
```
````

> Describe the tetragon service to see the port on which metrics are being exposed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Describe the `tetragon` service to see the port on which metrics are being exposed. The default port is `2112`.
```
Maybe let's document the default here?

Author: Makes sense, added that.

Author: @mtardy suggested removal of that part, since the output of 

```shell-session
kubectl get services tetragon -n kube-system
``` 

```
NAME       TYPE        CLUSTER-IP     EXTERNAL-IP   PORT(S)     AGE
tetragon   ClusterIP   10.96.54.218   <none>        2112/TCP    3m
```

already displays the port. I added a note as suggestion.

> Describe the tetragon service to see the port on which metrics are being exposed.
> 
> ```bash
> ➜  ~ kubectl describe service -n kube-system tetragon
> Name:              tetragon
> Namespace:         kube-system
> Labels:            app.kubernetes.io/instance=tetragon
>                    app.kubernetes.io/managed-by=Helm
>                    app.kubernetes.io/name=tetragon
>                    helm.sh/chart=tetragon-0.11.0
> Annotations:       meta.helm.sh/release-name: tetragon
>                    meta.helm.sh/release-namespace: kube-system
> Selector:          app.kubernetes.io/instance=tetragon,app.kubernetes.io/managed-by=Helm,app.kubernetes.io/name=tetragon,helm.sh/chart=tetragon-0.11.0
> Type:              ClusterIP
> IP Family Policy:  SingleStack
> IP Families:       IPv4
> IP:                10.96.54.218
> IPs:               10.96.54.218
> # Metrics Port is 2112
> Port:              metrics  2112/TCP
> TargetPort:        2112/TCP
> Endpoints:         172.18.0.2:2112
> Session Affinity:  None
> Events:            <none>
> ```
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note on the previous output that 2112 is the port on which the service is listening. 
It is also the port on which Tetragon listens for its metrics server with the default
Helm values.
```
I think you can remove that part since we already see the port in the previous command output.

Author: Sure, I added a separate note to it.

### Port Forwarding

> Use `kubectl port forward` to expose the metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To forward the metrics port locally, use `kubectl port forward`:
```

> ```bash
> ➜  ~ kubectl -n kube-system port-forward service/tetragon 2112:2112
> Forwarding from 127.0.0.1:2112 -> 2112
> Forwarding from [::1]:2112 -> 2112
> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```shell-session
kubectl -n kube-system port-forward service/tetragon 2112:2112
```
````

### Fetch the metrics

> Then the exposed metrics can be fetched using `curl` command at `localhost:2112/metrics`

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Then the metrics can be fetched using `curl` on `localhost:2112/metrics`:
```

> ```shell
> ➜  ~ curl localhost:2112/metrics
> 
> # HELP promhttp_metric_handler_errors_total Total number of internal errors encountered by the promhttp metric handler.
> # TYPE promhttp_metric_handler_errors_total counter
> promhttp_metric_handler_errors_total{cause="encoding"} 0
> promhttp_metric_handler_errors_total{cause="gathering"} 0
> # HELP tetragon_errors_total The total number of Tetragon errors. For internal use only.
> # TYPE tetragon_errors_total counter
> ...
> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```shell-session
curl localhost:2112/metrics
```

The output should be similar to this:

```
# HELP promhttp_metric_handler_errors_total Total number of internal errors encountered by the promhttp metric handler.
# TYPE promhttp_metric_handler_errors_total counter
promhttp_metric_handler_errors_total{cause="encoding"} 0
promhttp_metric_handler_errors_total{cause="gathering"} 0
# HELP tetragon_errors_total The total number of Tetragon errors. For internal use only.
# TYPE tetragon_errors_total counter
[...]
```
````

## Container

Tetragon, when installed as a container as mentioned in [Container Deployment]({{<ref "docs/getting-started/deployment/container" >}})

## Package

Tetragon, when installed via release packages as mentioned in [Package Deployment](../getting-started/deployment/package.md). It can be interacted with `tetragon` command. By default, metrics are disabled, which can be enabled using `--metrics-server` flag, by specifying the address.

### Set Metrics Address

Run `sudo tetragon --metrics-server localhost:2112` to set metrics address to `localhost:2112` and export metrics.

> ```bash
> ➜  ~ sudo tetragon --metrics-server localhost:2112
> [sudo] password for <user>: 
> time="2023-09-21T13:17:08+05:30" level=info msg="Starting tetragon" version=v0.11.0
> time="2023-09-21T13:17:08+05:30" level=info msg="config settings" config="mapeased  
> ...
> ...
> time="2023-09-21T13:17:08+05:30" level=info msg="Listening for events..."
> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```shell-session
sudo tetragon --metrics-server localhost:2112
```

The output should be similar to this:

```
time="2023-09-21T13:17:08+05:30" level=info msg="Starting tetragon" version=v0.11.0
time="2023-09-21T13:17:08+05:30" level=info msg="config settings" config="mapeased  
[...]
time="2023-09-21T13:17:08+05:30" level=info msg="Listening for events..."
```
````
Can you put the log line which specifies the metrics port? There is one if I remember correctly.

Author: sure.

### Fetch the Metrics

Then the exposed metrics can be fetched using `curl` command at `localhost:2112/metrics`

```shell
➜  ~ curl localhost:2112/metrics

# HELP promhttp_metric_handler_errors_total Total number of internal errors encountered by the promhttp metric handler.
# TYPE promhttp_metric_handler_errors_total counter
promhttp_metric_handler_errors_total{cause="encoding"} 0
promhttp_metric_handler_errors_total{cause="gathering"} 0
# HELP tetragon_errors_total The total number of Tetragon errors. For internal use only.
# TYPE tetragon_errors_total counter
...

> ```

Reviewer: I think instead of repeating this, we can factorize the way to reach the metrics endpoint, maybe with tabs or simply as you did with section headers and then have a single "fetch the metrics" instead of identical ones like that.

Author: Sure, added a "Fetch the metrics" section at the end, please take a look, and tell if it needs to be changed.

---
title: "Tetragon Metrics"
weight: 1
icon: "overview"
description: "Fetching and understanding Tetragon metrics"
---

> # Kubernetes

Author: Sure !

Tetragon, when installed with Helm as mentioned in 
[Deploying on Kubernetes]({{< ref "/docs/getting-started/deployment/kubernetes" >}}) creates a pod with the `tetragon-` prefix. It also creates a service named `tetragon` that exposes metrics on the specified port.

## Getting metrics port

Check if the `tetragon` service exists:

```shell-session
kubectl get services tetragon -n kube-system
```

The output should be similar to:
```
NAME       TYPE        CLUSTER-IP     EXTERNAL-IP   PORT(S)     AGE
tetragon   ClusterIP   10.96.54.218   <none>        2112/TCP    3m
```

{{< note >}}
In the previous output it shows, 2112 is the port on which the service is 
listening. It is also the port on which Tetragon listens for its metrics 

> server with the default Helm values.

Author: no worries, I changed that.

{{< /note >}}

## Port Forwarding

To forward the metrics port locally, use `kubectl port forward`:

```shell-session
kubectl -n kube-system port-forward service/tetragon 2112:2112
```

# Package

Tetragon, when installed via release packages as mentioned in [Package Deployment]({{< ref "/docs/getting-started/deployment/package" >}}). It can be interacted with `tetragon` command. By default, metrics are disabled, which can be enabled using `--metrics-server` flag, by specifying the address.

> 

Reviewer 3: Here tetragon is managed by systemd.  So please remove this part "It can be interacted with `tetragon` command."

Alternatively, the metrics address can also be set by creating a file under
`etc/tetragon/tetragon.conf.d/metrics-server`. 

> 

Reviewer 3: here you are missing the leading `/`  it is `/etc/...` and can you re-word please: by creating the `/etc/tetragon/tetragon.conf.d/metrics-server` drop-in configuration with the address where to listen as content.

Like it is state in the original documentation or examples ;-)

...
```

> ## Container

Reviewer 3: For container please let's @Vampouille contribute this part in https://github.com/cilium/tetragon/pull/1503/  ;-)

Author: Sure !

Tetragon, when installed as a container as mentioned in [Container Deployment]({{<ref "docs/getting-started/deployment/container" >}})

## Package

Tetragon, when installed via release packages as mentioned in [Package Deployment](../getting-started/deployment/package.md). It can be interacted with `tetragon` command. By default, metrics are disabled, which can be enabled using `--metrics-server` flag, by specifying the address.

> 

Reviewer 3: Hi @prateek041 please add that you can set the metrics address server by creating a file under `/etc/tetragon/tetragon.conf.d/metrics-server` with the address server as content, example `localhost:2112`

Reviewer 3: also please reference https://tetragon.cilium.io/docs/reference/tetragon-configuration/#configuration-examples for further examples

Author: looking into it.

Author: I added a [section](https://github.com/cilium/tetragon/pull/1495/files#diff-575dbe46cb3476f4aa4e207f5d24d5eaca95ec56bb691106be85b3c5e87f42b0R45) does this work ?

@tixxdz
